---
aliases:
- /2012/04/16/the-3-rs-reform-revolution-and-resistance-boston
- /2012/04/09/the-3-rs-reform-revolution-and-resistance-the-problematic-forms-of-anticapitalism-today
title: 'The 3 Rs: Reform, Revolution, and Resistance, Boston'
date: 2012-04-16
tags:
- Common Struggle Libertarian Communist Federation
- Kasama
- Reform
- Resistance
- Revolution
- Socialist Alternative
media-type:
- audio
- video
series:
- Reform, Revolution, and Resistance
speakers:
- Gayge
- J. Phil Thompson
- Jeff Booth
- Joe Ramsey
- Laura Lee Schmidt
---

_Panel held on April 16, 2012, in Boston, as part of the 3 Rs panel series._

_Thanks to [Doug Enaa Greene](/speakers/doug-enaa-greene/) (http://www.youtube.com/user/dwgthed) for the video recording._

## Video Recording

### Part One

{{< youtube OyKRn8hinb0 >}}

### Part Two

{{< youtube oKmHBywiLZw >}}

## Audio Recording

{{% audio type="mpeg" src="https://archive.org/download/The3RsReformRevolutionAndresistanceTheProblematicFormsOf_757/3RsReformRevolutionAndResistance.mp3" %}}

## Panelists

[Jeff Booth](/speakers/jeff-booth/) (Socialist Alternative)

[Gayge](/speakers/gayge/) (Common Struggle Libertarian Communist Federation)

[Joe Ramsey](/speakers/joe-ramsey/) (Kasama Project)

[Laura Lee Schmidt](/speakers/laura-lee-schmidt/) (Platypus)

[J. Phil Thompson](/speakers/j-phil-thompson/) (MIT)

## Description

>After the failure of the 1960s New Left, the underlying despair with regard to the real efficacy of political will, of political agency, in a historical situation of heightened helplessness, became a self-constitution as outsider, as other, rather than an instrument of transformation. Focused on the bureaucratic stasis of the Fordist, late 20th century world, the Left echoed the destruction of that world by the dynamics of capital: neoliberalism and globalization.
>
>The idea of a fundamental transformation became bracketed and, instead, was replaced by the more ambiguous notion of 'resistance.' The notion of resistance, however, says little about the nature of that which is being resisted, or of the politics of the resistance involved.
>
>'Resistance' is rarely based on a reflexive analysis of possibilities for fundamental change that are both generated and suppressed by the dynamic heteronomous order of capital. 'Resistance' is an undialectical category that does not grasp its own conditions of possibility; it fails to grasp the dynamic historical context of capital and its reconstitution of possibilities for both domination and emancipation, of which the 'resisters' do not recognize that that they are a part.

---Moishe Postone, "History and Helplessness: Mass Mobilization and Contemporary Forms of Anticapitalism" (Public Culture¸ 18.1: 2006)

Reform, revolution, resistance: what kind of weight do these categories hold for the Left today? How are they used, to where do they point, and what is their history? Join the Platypus Affiliated Society for a discussion concerning a question that has renewed immediacy in light of the #Occupy movement.
