---
aliases:
- /2012/03/31/the-90s-and-%c2%80%c2%9800s-left-today
- /2012/03/31/the-90s-and-2000s-left-today
title: The 90s and 2000's Left Today
date: 2012-03-31
media-type:
- audio
tags:
- Occupy
- Platypus International Convention 2012
- 1990s
- /2000s
- 90s
- Black Bloc
- Communisation
- Crimthinc
- Empire
- Kasama
- Neoconservatism
- Neoliberalism
- New SDS
- Parti communiste revolutionnaire
- Platypus
- RCP Canada
- Resistance
- Revolution Communist Party -- Canda
- Rhizomatic
- Rhizome
- SDS
- Social justice
speakers:
- Daniel Dulce
- Joshua Moufawad-Paul
- Mike Ely
- Nick Kreitman
- Thodoris Velissaris
---

_Panel held on March 31st, 2012 at the Fourth Annual Platypus International Convention, School of the Art Institute of Chicago._

## Audio Recording

{{% audio type="mpeg" src="https://archive.org/download/The90sAnd00sLeftToday/platypus_3-31-12.mp3" %}}

## Panelists

[Daniel Dulce](/speakers/daniel-dulce/) (Crimthinc)

[Thodoris Velissaris](/speakers/thodoris-velissaris) (Platypus)

[Nick Kreitman](/speakers/nick-kreitman) (Platypus, Formerly new SDS)

[Mike Ely](/speakers/mike-ely/) (Kasama)

[Joshua Moufawad-Paul](/speakers/joshua-moufawad-paul/) (Supporter, Parti communiste revolutionnaire
 - Revolutionary Communist Party (Canada)


## Description

The two decades of the 1990s-2000s form a cycle containing certain common as well as differing concerns. The second decade of the 21st century has begun under the mixed legacy of recent history, presenting important problems needing to be worked through, moving forward.

For Platypus's 2012 international convention, two plenary panels will ask speakers from various perspectives to bring their experience of the Left"s recent history to bear on today's political possibilities and challenges.

### The '90s Left Today

After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and collapse of the Soviet Union soon after, a new political era opened, in which Marxism was discredited and anarchism became predominant on the radical Left. The most pressing challenges of post-Cold War neo-liberal globalization came amid an era of prosperity at the supposed "end of history." Postmodernist disenchantment with "grand narratives" of emancipation meant a turn against "ideology." Social "justice" rather than freedom became the watchword for a better world. "Resistance" and "horizontal" or "rhizomatic" politics provided a model for "changing the world without taking power" (as John Holloway, inspired by the Zapatistas, put it). Information technology -- the rise of the internet -- matched the new cosmopolitanism. The global order of "empire" confronted by the "multitude" demanded access to the "commonwealth" (Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri). The "death of communism" challenged the Left's imagination of an emancipated future. "Black bloc" protest and "communisation" theory replaced traditional socialism, as the 20th century came to an uncertain close.

### The '00s Left Today

As a result of the 9/11 attacks, the War on Terror rekindled anti-imperialist protest, even while it seemed to deliver a grave blow to the newly emergent World Social Forum, "alterglobalisation" movement. Neo-conservatism in the U.S. presented the specter of growing divisions in the global order, to which the world's most vulnerable might fall victim. Religious fundamentalism appeared to surge. Disenchantment with capitalist development accompanied the social imagination of ecological crisis and economic downturn: the desire for a "green economy" and apparent need for decreased consumption. At the same time, new intensification of global migration of workers presented challenges for political integration. The U.S. and allied wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, and beyond, were met by an anti-war movement and a new generation of radicalization. But the wars were eclipsed by financial crisis and Obamaâs election, bringing anti-austerity protests (setting the stage later for #Occupy), as the first decade of the 21st century ended with the economic crisis lingering and even deepening, scotching hopes for a reversal of neoliberalism and return to "Keynesian" social investment policies. Neoliberalism and neoconservatism both stood discredited, but without presenting a clear alternative for the future.
